---
layout: post
title: The Start of a Journey
author: Calin Cascaval
---


While saying goodbye to a number of friends on the "last" hike I organized
for the BARD hiking group, someone (I forget who) suggested that I should
start post stories and photos of our new planned adventure in New
Zealand. So I decided to start journaling -- something that I have been
considering for a while, but I did not have a good theme. Yes, we've been
spending time outdoors, hiking, biking, and skiing, and I have posted a
number of my pictures either on
[500.px](https://500px.com/CalinCascaval){:target="_blank"} or shared
Dropbox or Google Photos albums, but writing text about those has been
hard. After all, we want these hikes and skiing trips to be uneventful!
So here we are, at the beginning of a new journey, one that feels exciting
and gives me a good reason to write.

Of course, everyone is asking why are we moving? The answer is not that
simple: it's been a while that we have been considering moving out of the
US. We had an amazing run of almost 30 years here, and we are grateful for
what this country has offered us:

- **free education**, and actually even better, we were paid to go to school,
  learn and earn our degrees.
- **amazing jobs** in industries that have been growing exponentially.
- **acceptance**: we never felt excluded or oppressed, even though we have
  _funny accents_. It used to be that folks used that opportunity to ask
  where are we from. It is also true that we _fit in_ -- smack in the middle of
  the white, middle class, educated category.
- **two loving kids**
- **natural beauty**

So why are we leaving then?

First and foremost, Google gave me an opportunity to continue the same work
I'm doing now, remotely from New Zealand. The [Google NZ site](https://www.geekzone.co.nz/content.asp?contentid=24620){:target="_blank"} is a new office and with the experience in the past
two years of working remotely, working in a timezone that is 3-5h away from
California seems quite doable. We already have a couple of people working in
that office and with the Google process asking for remote work, it's just
too easy and appealing to pass on the opportunity. Thank you Google!

New Zealand is a country of endless beauty, and as we looked around the
world, it seems to be one of the countries that truly matches our lifestyle:
small, outdoorsy, and yet ranking top on many issues that we care
about. Indeed, we do not care about guns, abolishing abortion rather than
the capital punishment, and reality shows instead of leadership. New Zealand
has a mature, adult government that takes care of its people. They have
programs to reduce the inequality rather than always favouring the rich. Are
these all an illusion because the grass is greener? We do not know for sure,
as we have not been there yet -- and this is exactly what this blog is about.
